% Candidate Principles regulating abstractness between UR and SR

These principles are from Chapter 1 of the book *Topics in
Phonological Theory* by Michael Kenstowicz and Charles Kisseberth
(Academic Press, 1977). Chapter 1 is titled "The Problem of the
Abstractness of Underlying Representations." They lay out a
fundemental question for phonological theory on page 1, paragraph 1.

"How direct is the relationship between an UR and a PR derived from
it?  In other words, to what extent may these two representations
differ from one another?"

I think this is one of the great unresolved questions, on which very
little to no progress has been made in 40 years.


## A (p.8)

The UR of a morpheme consists of all and only the invariant phonetic
properties of that morpheme's various PRs.


## A' (p.11)

The UR of a morpheme consists of only (but not necessarily all)
invariant phonetic properties of the phonetic realizations of the
morpheme; invariant properties of morphemes that are predictable by
rule may be omitted.

## B (p.18)

The UR of a morpheme includes those variant (alternating) and
invariant phonetic properties that are idiosyncratic
(unpredictable). But it may include only those variant properties that
occur in the PR that appears in issolation (or as close to isolation
as the grammar of the language permits).

## B' (p.26)

The UR of a morpheme includes those variant and invariant phonetic
properties that are idiosyncratic. But it may include only those
variant properties that occur in the greatest number of "contexts".


## B'' (p.28)

The UR of a morpheme may include both variant and invariant phonetic
properties. All of the variant properties selected to appear in the UR
must occur in a single surface alternant of that morpheme, the basic
alternant.  The choice of the basic alternant is constrained by a
principle of parallelism according to which the basic alternant for
all morphemes of a given morphological class (noun, verb, particle,
etc.) must occur in the same morphological context.

## C (p.32)

The UR of a morpheme includes those variant and invariant phonetic
properties that are idiosyncratic. But all of the variant properties
assigned to the UR must occur together in at least one phonetic
manifestation of the morpheme. This manifestation can be referred to
as the **basic alternant**.

## D (p.33)

The UR of a morpheme includes all those variant and invariant phonetic
properties that are idiosyncratic. Given a morpheme with the
underlying shape /P/i, /P/j, ... /P/n, there must be a [P]j (where
[P]j is one of the phonetic realizations of /P/j) such that [P]j
contains all of the feature specifications of /P/j路

## E (p.46)

The UR of a morpheme includes all those variant and invariant phonetic
properties that are idiosyncratic. Furthermore, given a morpheme with
the UR /P/i, /P/j, ... /P/n,, for all /P/j, it must be the case that
each feature value of /P/j occurs in a [P]j (though not all of the
feature values are required to occur together in the same [P]j).


## F (p.51)

Given a morpheme with the UR /P/i /P/j 路路路 /P/n for all /P/j, at least
one of the features of /P/j must appear in a corresponding [P]j of at
least one PR of that morpheme.

